Add Passkeys Guide (#455)
swiftlang/swift-org-website: server/guides/webauthn.md

---
layout: page
title: Going passwordless with Passkeys
---

> In this tutorial we will explore Passkeys. To be more specific, we'll explore how we can integrate the Swift WebAuthn library into a server-side Swift app. The process of registering and authenticating using Passkeys is pretty simple, but requires some back and forth between client and server. Therefore this tutorial is split into two separate parts:

Reviewer: Maybe add a link to the library repo here?

```suggestion
In this tutorial we will explore Passkeys. To be more specific, we'll explore how we can integrate the [Swift WebAuthn library](https://github.com/swift-server/webauthn-swift) into a server-side Swift app. The process of registering and authenticating using Passkeys is pretty simple, but requires some back and forth between client and server. Therefore this tutorial is split into two separate parts:
```

Author: done

1. Passkey Registration

> 2. Passkey Authentication

Reviewer: Unless we want these to act as a table of contents with links, I don't think we need a list here; we can just make it part of the sentence above, e.g. `...split into two separate parts: Passkey registration and Passkey authentication.`

Today I'll show you an example implementation for a standalone Passkey login, however it is also possible to integrate webauthn-swift along an existing, password-based, login, for hardware based 2FA.

What are Passkeys? Others already did a good job at explaining this, so why reinvent the wheel? Here is a quote from [passkeys.com](https://passkeys.com):

> Passkeys are the new standard to authenticate on the web.
> Passkeys are a safer and easier replacement for passwords. With passkeys, users can sign in to apps and websites with a biometric sensor (such as a fingerprint or facial recognition), PIN, or pattern, freeing them from having to remember and manage passwords.

To read more about Passkeys and how they work I recommend the following two resources:

- Introduction: [https://webauthn.guide](https://webauthn.guide/)
- Details: [https://w3c.github.io/webauthn](https://w3c.github.io/webauthn/)
- Apple Developer Documentation: [https://developer.apple.com/passkeys](https://developer.apple.com/passkeys/)

## Fundamentals

> Passkeys are integrated into our browsers. Through a JavaScript api exposed by the browsers we trigger the Passkey prompts.

Reviewer: Maybe something like this reads better?

```suggestion
Passkeys are integrated into our browsers, and they expose a JavaScript API that can be used to trigger the Passkey prompts.
```

*Safari Passkey prompt:*
![](/assets/images/server-guides/safari_passkey_prompt.png)

*Another example - 1Password prompt:*

> ![](/assets/images/server-guides/1password_passkey_prompt.png)

Reviewer: Would be great to add some ALT texts to the images (inside the `[]` brackets) here for better accessibility.

These two prompts are the result of calling `navigator.credentials.create(...)` and `navigator.credentials.get(...)`.

> To get a better understanding let's quickly play around with this API. Go to `https://swift.org`, open the developer panel of your browser and switch to the JavaScript console. Create the following variable:

Reviewer: We're already on Swift.org, so maybe "open Swift.org in a new tab" is better than "go to Swift.org". Also, we should make it a link.

```suggestion
To get a better understanding let's quickly play around with this API. Open [Swift.org](https://swift.org) in a new tab, open the developer panel of your browser and switch to the JavaScript console. Create the following variable:
```

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

`js` will highlight the syntax here:

![CleanShot 2023-12-17 at 11 08 46](https://github.com/apple/swift-org-website/assets/35671299/e97666be-b500-4e74-b984-9f58ef1ec824)

Author: oh! I could swear it wasn't working for me last time I tried. Now it's working tho!

const publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions = {
    challenge: Uint8Array.from(
        "randomStringFromServer", c => c.charCodeAt(0)),
    rp: {
        name: "Swift",
        id: "swift.org",
    },
    user: {
        id: Uint8Array.from(
            "UZSL85T9AFC", c => c.charCodeAt(0)),
        name: "me@example.com",
        displayName: "FooBar",
    },
    pubKeyCredParams: [{alg: -7, type: "public-key"}],
    authenticatorSelection: {
        authenticatorAttachment: "cross-platform",
    },
    timeout: 60000,
    attestation: "direct"
};
```

Don't worry, you don't have to understand the content. In fact the Swift WebAuthn library will create this for you automatically. Now calling the Passkeys API with our newly created `publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions` will prompt you to create a new Passkey:

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

const credential = await navigator.credentials.create({
    publicKey: publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions
});
```

## Act 1 - Setup

### Setting up the Relying Party

If you haven't already downloaded the [demo project](https://github.com/brokenhandsio/swift-webauthn-guide), you should do so now. There's a `starter` and `final` project. Open the starter project and add the Swift WebAuthn library to your `Package.swift`:

> ```Swift

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```swift
```

This has to be lowercase to work properly.

![CleanShot 2023-12-17 at 11 11 25](https://github.com/apple/swift-org-website/assets/35671299/7152cc07-2e12-40e6-a710-a035569a482f)

dependencies: [
    // ...
    .package(url: "https://github.com/swift-server/webauthn-swift.git", from: "1.0.0-alpha")
],

// ...

targets: [
    .target(
        name: "App",
        dependencies: [
            // ...
            .product(name: "WebAuthn", package: "webauthn-swift")
// ...
]
```

> First, you need to create an instance of `WebAuthnManager`, the core of the Swift WebAuthn library. The WebAuthn library works with any server-side Swift framework, but we'll use Vapor for this tutorial. With Vapor, you could extend `Request` with a `webAuthn` property which allows us to easily access it in the route handlers. Add this in a new file called `Request+webAuthn.swift`:

Reviewer: I might be wrong, but should this not be named `Request+WebAuthn.swift` according to typical naming convention?

```suggestion
First, you need to create an instance of `WebAuthnManager`, the core of the Swift WebAuthn library. The WebAuthn library works with any server-side Swift framework, but we'll use Vapor for this tutorial. With Vapor, you could extend `Request` with a `webAuthn` property which allows us to easily access it in the route handlers. Add this in a new file called `Request+WebAuthn.swift`:
```

Author: Isn't `Type+lowercaseForFunctionsOrParameters.swift` the typical naming convention? `Request+webAuthn.swift` extends `Request` with a computed property, not a new type: `var webAuthn: WebAuthnManager {}`

Reviewer: Could be, yes. I tend to generalize the files to include more than one extension, e.g. `Request+Extensions.swift`. Feel free to leave this as is. It's an opinionated topic anyway, so there's no right and wrong here. 🙂

```bash
swift run App serve --hostname localhost
```

Great, that's everything we need to get started.

## Act 2 - Registration

From the UI perspective we only need three components: Two buttons and a text field for entering a username! No password field needed... that's why we're here after all! Let's start with building a quick registration form in HTML. Insert the following form into `Resources/Views/index.leaf` just after `<!-- Form -->`:

```html
<form id="registerForm">
    <input id="username" type="text" />
    <button type="submit">Register</button>
</form>
```

The app should now return you a blank HTML form at http://localhost:8080/.

### Planning ahead

Before we jump into the business logic let's write down what we need:
1. When a user clicks the "Register" button we will notify our server about a new registration attempt.
2. The server will put together a few pieces of information and send these back to the client (the browser).
3. The client will take this information and pass it into the `create(parseCreationOptionsFromJSON(...))` JavaScript function which will trigger the Passkey prompt. The returned value of this function is our brand new Passkey! Great!

> 4. Before opening our first beer we quickly need to send our new Passkey back to the server, verify it and persist it in a database.

Reviewer: >Before opening our first beer...

I'm not sure if this metaphor for celebration (which I assume this is?) is that obvious here. Might be worth either dropping it or rewriting it. Also, there might be a better metaphor as not everyone enjoys a cold 🍺😄

It sounds like a lot of work, but it's actually pretty simple.

### Bringing `<form>` to life

Alright let's start with step one. Add this after the closing `</form>` tag from the previous step:

> ```HTML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```html
```

<script type="module">
  // import WebAuthn wrapper
  import { create, parseCreationOptionsFromJSON } from 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@github/webauthn-json@2.1.1/dist/esm/webauthn-json.browser-ponyfill.js';

  // Get a reference to our registration form
  const registerForm = document.getElementById("registerForm");

  // Listen for the form's "submit" event
  registerForm.addEventListener("submit", async function(event) {
    event.preventDefault();

    // Get the username
    const username = document.getElementById("username").value;

    // Send request to server
    const registerResponse = await fetch('/register?username=' + username);

    // Parse response as json and pass into wrapped WebAuthn API
    const registerResponseJSON = await registerResponse.json();
    const passkey = await create(parseCreationOptionsFromJSON(registerResponseJSON));
  });
</script>
```

> First we add a third-party script developed by GitHub which adds user-friendly wrappers on top of the original WebAuthn APIs `navigator.credentials.create` and `navigator.credentials.get`. This is just for convenience and not mandatory! If you don't want to use it you'll have to deserialise some of the `registrationOptions` properties since the original API expects a few "raw" byte arrays. Using the wrapper we can simply pass in the JSON response from our server - neat! The official WebAuthn API will [support this out of the box at some point](https://w3c.github.io/webauthn/#sctn-parseCreationOptionsFromJSON), but for now we depend on GitHub's "webauthn-json" library.

Reviewer: I believe the `—` character is preferred here over the usual hyphen.

```suggestion
First we add a third-party script developed by GitHub which adds user-friendly wrappers on top of the original WebAuthn APIs `navigator.credentials.create` and `navigator.credentials.get`. This is just for convenience and not mandatory! If you don't want to use it you'll have to deserialise some of the `registrationOptions` properties since the original API expects a few "raw" byte arrays. Using the wrapper we can simply pass in the JSON response from our server — neat! The official WebAuthn API will [support this out of the box at some point](https://w3c.github.io/webauthn/#sctn-parseCreationOptionsFromJSON), but for now we depend on GitHub's "webauthn-json" library.
```

```swift
app.get("register") { req in
    // Create and login user
    let username = try req.query.get(String.self, at: "username")
    let user = User(username: username)
    try await user.create(on: req.db)
    req.auth.login(user)

    // Generate registration options
    let options = req.webAuthn.beginRegistration(user:
        .init(
            id: try [UInt8](user.requireID().uuidString.utf8),
            name: user.username,
            displayName: user.username
        )
    )

    // Also pass along challenge because we need it later
    req.session.data["registrationChallenge"] = Data(options.challenge).base64EncodedString()

    return CreateCredentialOptions(publicKey: options)
}
```

On `/register` this creates a new user and calls the `beginRegistration` function with the newly created user. This will give us a set of options which we send back to the client. Additionally we store the challenge in a cookie because we'll need it later when verifying the new Passkey. If you inspect the returned options you'll notice that these are the options you manually entered in your browser's JavaScript console at the beginning of this blog post!

> The WebAuthn API expects the options inside a property named `publicKey`. That's why we return an instance of `CreateCredentialOptions` - a type which doesn't exist yet. So let's create and conform it to `AsyncResponseEncodable` so we can easily return it an a Vapor route handler:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WebAuthn API expects the options inside a property named `publicKey`. That's why we return an instance of `CreateCredentialOptions` — a type which doesn't exist yet. So let's create and conform it to `AsyncResponseEncodable` so we can easily return it an a Vapor route handler:
```

```swift
struct CreateCredentialOptions: Encodable, AsyncResponseEncodable {
    let publicKey: PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions

    func encodeResponse(for request: Request) async throws -> Response {
        var headers = HTTPHeaders()
        headers.contentType = .json
        return try Response(status: .ok, headers: headers, body: .init(data: JSONEncoder().encode(self)))
    }
}
```

Time to give it a try: Entering a username and clicking "Register" should trigger the prompt asking you to create a new Passkey! However nothing will happen afterwards. Let's fix that!

### Verifying and persisting the Passkey

After the browser creates the Passkey we need to send it to our server, verify everything went smoothly and persist it somewhere.

First, let's send the Passkey to our server. In our JavaScript code add this just below `const passkey = await create(parseCreationOptionsFromJSON(registerResponseJSON));` in the `registerForm` event listener:

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

        confirmCredentialIDNotRegisteredYet: { _ in true}
    )

    try await Passkey(
        id: credential.id,
        publicKey: credential.publicKey.base64URLEncodedString().asString(),
        currentSignCount: credential.signCount,
        userID: user.requireID()
    ).save(on: req.db)

    return HTTPStatus.ok
})
```

Congratulations, you just built a Passkey registration! Entering a username and hitting "Register" should now redirect you to a private page. The passkey should also appear in your database (in the passkeys table) now.

## Act 2 - Log in

Now that we have a Passkey we can use it to log in. The process is very similar to the registration process, except we don't need an input field for the username.
Let's start with the frontend. Add a new HTML form below the registration in `Resources/Views/index.leaf`:

```html
</form>
<!-- End of registration form -->

<form id="loginForm">
    <button type="submit">Login</button>
</form>
```

Next we need to import two additional helper from the GitHub WebAuthn wrapper. Update the import statement in the `<script>` tag to include `get` and `parseRequestOptionsFromJSON`:

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

import { create, get, parseCreationOptionsFromJSON, parseRequestOptionsFromJSON } from 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net.....
```

At the end of the script add the following code:

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

// ...
//     location.href = "/private";
// });

// Get a reference to our login form
const loginForm = document.getElementById("loginForm");

// Listen for the form's "submit" event
loginForm.addEventListener("submit", async function(event) {
  event.preventDefault();
  // Send request to Vapor app
  const loginResponse = await fetch('/login');
  // Parse response as json and pass into wrapped WebAuthn API
  const loginResponseJSON = await loginResponse.json();
  const loginAttempt = await get(parseRequestOptionsFromJSON(loginResponseJSON));
});
```

Similar to the registration we listen for the form's `submit` event. On submit we send a `/login` request to our backend. The response contains a handful of options and a randomly generated challenge. When passing this data to `get(parseRequestOptionsFromJSON(...))` the browser will prompt the user to log in using a Passkey. On success the challenge will be signed by the Passkey. This signed challenge is what we send back to the server in a second request. Add this just after `const loginAttempt = await get(parseRequestOptionsFromJSON(loginResponseJSON));`:

> ```html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

    let options = try req.webAuthn.beginAuthentication()
    // Also pass along challenge because we need it later
    req.session.data["authChallenge"] = Data(options.challenge).base64EncodedString()
    return RequestCredentialOptions(publicKey: options)
}
```

Additionally we store the challenge in a cookie because we'll need it later when verifying the Passkey. Running the server and pressing "Login" should now trigger the Passkey prompt. If you previously registered it should also show you the username (or a list of usernames if you registered more than one account). However if you try to confirm the prompt you'll notice that nothing happens.

The last step will be to verify login attempts in the `POST /login` endpoint. Start by adding the endpoint and retrieving the challenge from the users session:

```swift
app.post("login") { req in
    // Obtain the challenge we stored on the server for this session
    guard let challengeEncoded = req.session.data["authChallenge"],
        let challenge = Data(base64Encoded: challengeEncoded) else {
        throw Abort(.badRequest, reason: "Missing authentication challenge")
    }

    req.session.data["authChallenge"] = nil
}
```

> To prevent attackers from reusing the challenge we delete it from the session right away. Read more about replay attacks [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replay_attack). To verify the login attempt we first decode it from the request body and try to find the corresponding Passkey in our database. If we find a Passkey we can continue and verify the login attempt. Add this below `req.session.data["authChallenge"] = nil`:

Reviewer: If you don't already know what a Replay attack is, I think something like this read better:

```suggestion
To prevent attackers from reusing the challenge, using a so-called [Replay attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replay_attack), we delete it from the session right away. To verify the login attempt we first decode it from the request body and try to find the corresponding Passkey in our database. If we find a Passkey we can continue and verify the login attempt. Add this below `req.session.data["authChallenge"] = nil`:
```

2. Passkey Authentication

To avoid starting completely from scratch and turning this blog article into a whole book, I prepared a small starter project which you can [download here](https://github.com/brokenhandsio/swift-webauthn-guide).

Today I'll show you an example implementation for a standalone Passkey login, however it is also possible to integrate webauthn-swift along an existing, password-based, login, for hardware based 2FA.

What are Passkeys? Others already did a good job at explaining this, so why reinvent the wheel? Here is a quote from [passkeys.com](https://passkeys.com):

> Passkeys are the new standard to authenticate on the web.
> Passkeys are a safer and easier replacement for passwords. With passkeys, users can sign in to apps and websites with a biometric sensor (such as a fingerprint or facial recognition), PIN, or pattern, freeing them from having to remember and manage passwords.

To read more about Passkeys and how they work I recommend the following two resources:

- Introduction: https://webauthn.guide/
- Details: https://w3c.github.io/webauthn/
- Apple Developer Documentation: https://developer.apple.com/passkeys/

## Act 1 - Setup

> #### Setting up the frontend

Author: 👍🏼

Passkeys are integrated into our browsers. Through a JavaScript api exposed by the browsers we trigger the Passkey prompts.

> *Safari Passkey prompt:*

Author: yep!

![](/assets/images/server-guides/safari_passkey_prompt.png)

*Another example - 1Password prompt:*
![](/assets/images/server-guides/1password_passkey_prompt.png)

These two prompts are the result of calling `navigator.credentials.create(...)` and `navigator.credentials.get(...)`.

To get a better understanding let's quickly play around with this API. Go to `https://swift.org`, open the developer panel of your browser and switch to the JavaScript console. Create the following variable:

> ```JavaScript

Author: I just tried a couple of options (JavaScript, js, JS) and none of them seem to be working. Does swift.org support JS code highlighting? `html` does work for HTML code, but not JS.

    },
    pubKeyCredParams: [{alg: -7, type: "public-key"}],
    authenticatorSelection: {
        authenticatorAttachment: "cross-platform",
    },
    timeout: 60000,
    attestation: "direct"
};
```

Don't worry, you don't have to understand it's content. In fact the Swift WebAuthn library will create this for you automatically. Now calling the Passkeys API with our newly created `publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions` will prompt you to create a new Passkey:

```JavaScript
const credential = await navigator.credentials.create({
    publicKey: publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions
});
```

#### Setting up the Relying Party

If you haven't already downloaded the [demo project](https://github.com/brokenhandsio/swift-webauthn-guide), you should do so now. There's a `starter` and `final` project. Open the starter project and add the Swift WebAuthn library to your `Package.swift`:

```Swift
dependencies: [
    // ...
    .package(url: "https://github.com/swift-server/webauthn-swift.git", from: "1.0.0-alpha")
],

// ...

targets: [
    .target(
        name: "App",
        dependencies: [
            // ...
            .product(name: "WebAuthn", package: "webauthn-swift")

> // ...

Author: you mean the `// ...` or the entire Package.swift block?

]
```

First, you need to create an instance of `WebAuthnManager`, the core of the Swift WebAuthn library. The WebAuthn library works with any server-side Swift framework, but we'll use Vapor for this tutorial. With Vapor, you could extend `Request` with a `webAuthn` property which allows us to easily access it in the route handlers. Add this in a new file called `Request+webAuthn.swift`:

```swift
import Vapor
import WebAuthn

extension Request {
    var webAuthn: WebAuthnManager {

>         WebAuthnManager(

Author: Cheap, it's just a simple stateless struct with 3 properties. I extended Request only to reduce the boilerplate

            config: WebAuthnManager.Config(
                // 1
                relyingPartyID: "localhost",
                // 2
                relyingPartyName: "Vapor Passkey Tutorial",
                // 3
                relyingPartyOrigin: "http://localhost:8080"
            )
        )
    }
}
```

Here we configure 3 things:

> 1. The `relyingPartyID` identifies your app based solely on the domain (not the scheme, port, or path) it can be accessed on. All created Passkeys will be scoped to this identifier. That means a Passkey created at `example.org` can only be used on the same domain. This prevents other websites from talking to random Passkeys. However this also means if you want to change your domain at some point all users need to re-create their Passkeys!

Author: yep

The WebAuthn API expects the options inside a property named `publicKey`. That's why we return an instance of `CreateCredentialOptions` - a type which doesn't exist yet. So let's create and conform it to `AsyncResponseEncodable` so we can easily return it an a Vapor route handler:

```swift
struct CreateCredentialOptions: Encodable, AsyncResponseEncodable {
    let publicKey: PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions

    func encodeResponse(for request: Request) async throws -> Response {
        var headers = HTTPHeaders()
        headers.contentType = .json
        return try Response(status: .ok, headers: headers, body: .init(data: JSONEncoder().encode(self)))
    }
}
```

Time to give it a try: Entering a username and clicking "Register" should trigger the prompt asking you to create a new Passkey! However nothing will happen afterwards. Let's fix that!

### Verifying and persisting the Passkey

> After the browser created the Passkey we need to send it to our server, verify everything went smoothly and persist it somewhere.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the browser creates the Passkey we need to send it to our server, verify everything went smoothly and persist it somewhere.
```
